Peters Flat - USPET001
Additional Site Information

Henri D. Grissino-Mayer, Thomas W. Swetnam, and Christopher H. Baisan


Dating Method: Crossdated

Related ITRDB Chronology: az549.crn

Sample Storage Location: Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ. 

Reference: Grissino-Mayer, H.D., Baisan, C.H., Swetnam, T.W. 1995. Fire history in the 
Pinaleño Mountains of southeastern Arizona: Effects of human-related disturbances. In: 
L.F. Debano, G.J. Gottfried, R.H. Hamre, C.B. Edminster, P.F. Ffolliott, and A. Ortega-
Rubio, eds., Biodiversity and Management of the Madrean Archipelago: The Sky Islands of 
Southwestern United States and Northwestern Mexico. USDA Forest Service General Technical 
Report RM 264: 399-407.

Abstract: We reconstructed the history of fire at two sites in the mixed-conifer forests 
of the Pinaleno Mountains of southern Arizona from 90 fire- scarred living and dead 
southwestern white pine (Pinus strobiformis) and ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) trees. 
We used dendroecological techniques to date nearly 2000 fire scars to their exact year of 
formation, and obtained age structure information from over 600 increment cores and cross-
sections collected from Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii) and corkbark fir (Abies 
lasiocarpa). We compared the age structure data with the reconstruction of past fires to 
determine which fires may have had an effect on the higher-elevation forests. During the 
pre-settlement period (prior to 1880), low-intensity surface fires occurred once every 
four to six years, based on the median probability interval derived using the Weibull 
distribution. The age structure of the spruce-fir forest suggests that the forest 
established after a stand-replacement fire that occurred in 1685, considered one of the 
most widespread and intense of any reconstructed fire event. Fires had occurred 
predominantly in the early portion of the growing season (May and June) similar to current 
dominant season of fire activity. The cessation of episodic fires after 1893 can be 
attributed to a combination of human-related disturbances, especially grazing and fire 
exclusion. The absence of ecologically-significant fires during the last 100 years in the 
Pinaleno Mountains should be considered when developing land and fire management plans for 
this environmentally sensitive area. 

